Create Basic Data Types Tutorial (#1514)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/language/0lg_00_basic_datatypes.md

Before proceeding, it's necessary to have completed the [Get Started](https://ocaml.org/docs/get-started) series of tutorials as well as [Functions and Values](/docs/values-and-functions).

<!--
The goal of this tutorial is to provide for the following capabilities:
- Handle data of all predefined types using dedicated syntax
- Write variant type definitions: simple, recursive, and polymorphic
- Write record type definitions (without mutable fields)
- Write type aliases
- Use pattern matching to define functions for all basic type
-->

## Predefined Types

### Integers, Floats, Booleans, and Characters

#### Integers

The `int` type is the default and basic integer type in OCaml. When you enter a whole number, OCaml recognises it as an integer, as shown in this example:
```ocaml
# 42;;
- : int = 42
```

The `int` type represents platform-dependent signed integers. This means `int` does not always have same the number of bits. It depends on underlying platform characteristics, such as processor architecture or operating system. Operations on `int` values are provided by the [`Stdlib`](/api/Stdlib.html) and the [`Int`](/api/Int.html) modules.

> Usually, `int` has 31 bits in 32-bit architectures and 63 in 64-bit architectures because one bit is reserved for OCaml's runtime operation. The standard library also provides [`Int32`](/api/Int32.html) and [`Int64`](/api/Int64.html) modules, which support platform independent operations on 32- and 64-bit signed integers. These modules are not detailed in this tutorial.

Reviewer: Can part (or all) of the paragraph be deleted since it talks about things not covered in this tutorial?

#### Arrays

Arrays are finite and fixed-sized sequences of values of the same type. Here are a couple of examples:
```ocaml
# [| 0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5 |];;
- : int array = [|0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5|]

# [| 'x'; 'y'; 'z' |];;
- : char array = [|'x'; 'y'; 'z'|]

# [| "foo"; "bar"; "baz" |];;
- : string array = [|"foo"; "bar"; "baz"|]
```

Arrays may contain values of any type. Here arrays are `int array`, `char array`, and `string array`, but any type of data can be used in an array. Usually, `array` is said to be a polymorphic type. Strictly speaking, it is a type operator, and it accepts a type as a parameter (here `int`, `char`, and `string`) to form another type (those inferred here). This is the empty array.
```ocaml
# [||];;
- : 'a array = [||]
```
Remember, `'a` ("alpha") is a type variable: a type parameter that will be replaced by another type.

Like `string` and `bytes`, arrays support direct access, but the syntax is not the same.
```ocaml
# [| 'x'; 'y'; 'z' |].(2);;
- : char = 'z'
```

Arrays are mutable, meaning they can't be extended or shortened, but each element may be updated.
```ocaml
# let letter = [| 'v'; 'x'; 'y'; 'z' |];;
val letter : char array = [|'v'; 'x'; 'y'; 'z'|]

> # letter.(2) <- '3';;

Reviewer: Since the arrow is pointing the other way for the first time (that I remember), should we speak to it? After some pondering, I saw what it was doing (passing `3` to the 2nd position of `letter`, but it confused me at first.

Author: I'm writing something on this.

- : unit = ()

# letter;;
- : char array = [|'v'; 'x'; '3'; 'z'|]
```

> Operations on arrays are provided by the [`Array`](/api/Array.html) module. There is a dedicated tutorial on Arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operations on arrays are provided by the [`Array`](/api/Array.html) module. There is a dedicated [tutorial on Arrays](https://ocaml.org/docs/arrays).
```

#### Lists

As literals, lists are very much like arrays. Here are the same previous examples turned into lists.
```ocaml
# [ 0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5 ];;
- : int list = [0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5]

# [ 'x'; 'y'; 'z' ];;
- : char list = ['x'; 'y'; 'z']

# [ "foo"; "bar"; "baz" ];;
- : string list = ["foo"; "bar"; "baz"]
```

Like arrays, lists are finite sequences of values of the same type. They are polymorphic, too. However, lists are extensible, immutable, and don't support direct access to all the values they contain. Lists play a central role in functional programming, so they have a [dedicated tutorial](/docs/lists).

> Operations on lists are provided by the [`List`](/api/List.html) module. The `List.append` function concatenates two lists. It can be used as an operator with the symbol `@`.

Reviewer: Do you want to tell them how to pronounce `@`?

Author: Damm! I don't how to pronounce that!

There are symbols of special importance with respect to lists:
- The empty list is written `[]`, has type `'a list'`, and is pronounced “nil.”
- The list constructor operator, written `::`, and pronounced “cons,” is used to add a value at the head of a list.

Together, they are the basic means to build a list and access the data it stores. For instance, here is how lists are built by successively applying the cons (`::`) operator:
```ocaml
# 3 :: [];;
- : int list = [3]

# 2 :: 3 :: [];;
- : int list = [2; 3]

# 1 :: 2 :: 3 :: [];;
- : int list = [1; 2; 3]
```

Pattern matching provides the basic means to access data stored inside a list.
```ocaml
# match [1; 2; 3] with
  | x :: u -> x
  | [] -> raise Exit;;
- : int = 1

# match [1; 2; 3] with
  | x :: y :: u -> y
  | x :: u -> x
  | [] -> raise Exit;;
- : int = 2
```

> In the above expressions, `[1; 2; 3]` is the value that is matched over. Each expression between the `|` and `->` symbols is a pattern. They are expressions of type list, only formed using `[]`, `::`, and variables names that represent various shapes a list may have. When the pattern is `[]`, it means “if the list is empty.” The pattern `x :: u` means “if the list contains data, let `x` be the first element of the list and `u` be the rest of the list.” Expressions at the right of the `->` symbol are the results returned in each corresponding case.

Author: @christinerose 
```suggestion
In the above expressions, `[1; 2; 3]` is the value that is matched over. Each expression between the `|` and `->` symbols is a pattern. They are expressions of type list, only formed using `[]`, `::`, and variables names that represent various shapes a list may have. The pattern `[]` means “if the list is empty.” The pattern `x :: u` means “if the list contains data, let `x` be the first element of the list and `u` be the rest of the list.” Expressions at the right of the `->` symbol are the results returned in each corresponding case.
```

Should both sentences on both kind of patterns have the same structure? Both either with "when" or without?

Reviewer: Nice! Yes!

# None;;
- : 'a option = None

# Some 42;;
- : int option = Some 42

# Some "hello";;
- : string option = Some "hello"
```

Here is an example of pattern matching on an option value:
```ocaml
# match Some 42 with None -> raise Exit | Some x -> x;;
- : int = 42
```

Operations on options are provided by the [`Option`](/api/Option.html) module. Options are discussed in the [Error Handling](/docs/error-handling) guide.

#### Results

The `result` type can be used to express that a function's outcome can be either success or failure. There are only two ways to build a result value: either using `Ok` or `Error` with the intended meaning. Both constructors can hold any kind of data. The `result` type is polymorphic, but it has two type parameters: one for `Ok` values and another for `Error` values.
```ocaml
# Ok 42;;
- : (int, 'a) result = Ok 42

# Error "Sorry";;
- : ('a, string) result = Error "Sorry"
```

Operations on results are provided by the [`Result`](/api/Result.html) module. Results are discussed in the [Error Handling](/docs/error-handling) guide.

### Tuples

Here is a tuple containing two values, also known as a pair.
```ocaml
# (3, 'a');;
- : int * char = (3, 'a')
```

> That pair contains the integer `3` and the character `'a'`; its type is `int * char`. The `*` symbol stands for _product type_.

Author: ````suggestion
# (3, 'K');;
- : int * char = (3, 'K')
```

That pair contains the integer `3` and the character `'K'`; its type is `int * char`. The `*` symbol stands for _product type_.
````

Removing more 'a'

This generalises to tuples with 3 or more elements. For instance, `(6.28, true, "hello")` has type `float * bool * string`. The types `int * char` and `float * bool * string` are called _product types_. The `*` symbol is used to denote types bundled together in products.

The predefined function `fst` returns the first element of a pair, while `snd` returns the second element of a pair.
```ocaml
# fst (3, 'a');;
- : int = 3

# snd (3, 'a');;
- : char = 'a'
```

In the standard library, both are defined using pattern matching. Here is how a function extracts the third element of the product of four types:
```ocaml
# let f x = match x with (a, b, c, d) -> c;;
val f : 'a * 'b * 'c * 'd -> 'c = <fun>
```

> Note that types `int * char * bool`, `int * (char * bool)`, and `(int * char) * bool` are not the same. The values `(42, 'a', true)`, `(42, ('a', true))`, and `((42, 'a'), true)` are not equal. In mathematical language, the product type operator `*` is not associative.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that types `int * char * bool`, `int * (char * bool)`, and `(int * char) * bool` are not the same. The values `(42, 'a', true)`, `(42, ('a', true))`, and `((42, 'a'), true)` are not equal. In mathematical language, the product type operator `*` is not _associative_.
```

This use of this term (I believe)

### Functions

The type of functions from type `a` to type `b` is written `a -> b`. Here are a few examples:
```ocaml
# fun x -> x * x;;
- : int -> int = <fun>

# (fun x -> x * x) 9;;
- : int = 81
```

The first expression is an anonymous function of type `int -> int`. The type is inferred from the expression `x * x`, which must be of type `int` since `*` is an operator that returns an `int`. The `<fun>` printed in place of the value is a token, meaning functions don't have a value to be displayed. This is because, if they have been compiled, their code is no longer available.

The second expression is function application. The parameter `9` is applied, and the result `81` is returned.

```ocaml
# fun x -> x;;
- : 'a -> 'a = <fun>

# (fun x -> x) 42;;
- : int = 42

# (fun x -> x) "This is really disco!";;
- : string = "This is really disco!"
```

> The first expression is another anonymous function. It is the identity function, it can be applied to anything, and it returns its argument unchanged. This means that its parameter can be of any type, and its result has the same type. The same code can be applied to data of different types. This is called _polymorphism_.

Author: ```suggestion
The first expression is another anonymous function. It is the _identity_ function, it can be applied to anything, and it returns its argument unchanged. This means that its parameter can be of any type, and its result has the same type. The same code can be applied to data of different types. This is called _polymorphism_.
```

This is the first use of the math term “identity”

> Remember, the `'a` is a _type variable_, so values of any type can be passed to the function and replaces the type variable. Its identity has the same input and output type, whatever it may be.

Author: ```suggestion
Remember, the `'a` is a _type variable_, so values of any type can be passed to the function and replaces the type variable. The identity function has the same input and output type, whatever it may be.
```

Defining a function is the same as naming a value, as illustrated in the first expression:

```ocaml
# let g x = x * x;;
val g : int -> int = <fun>

# g 9;;
- : int = 81
```

Executable OCaml code consists primarily of functions, so it's beneficial to make them as concise and clear as possible. The function `g` is defined here using a shorter, more common, and maybe more intuitive syntax.

In OCaml, functions may terminate without returning the expected type value by throwing an exception (`exn`), which does not appear in its type. There is no way to know if a function may raise an exception without inspecting its code.
```ocaml
# raise;;
- : exn -> 'a' = <fun>
```

Exceptions are discussed in the [Error Handling](/docs/error-handling) guide.

Functions may have several parameters.
```ocaml
# fun a b -> a ^ " " ^ b;;
- : string -> string -> string = <fun>

# let mean a b = (a + b) / 2;;
val mean : int -> int -> int = <fun>
```

Like the product type symbol `*`, the function type symbol `->` is not associative. The following two types are not the same:
- `(int -> int) -> int` : This function takes a function of type `int -> int` as a parameter and returns an `int` as the result.

> - `int -> (int -> int)` : This function takes an `int` asa  parameter and returns a function of type `int -> int` as the result.

Reviewer: Is this similar to what we covered in Functions & Variables? About how `->` associates to the right? (li 562)

Author: Yes it is.

### Unit

Uniquely, the type `unit` has only one value. It is written `()` and pronounced “unit.”

The `unit` type has several uses. Mainly, it serves as a token when a function does not need to be passed data or doesn't have any data to return once it has completed its computation. This happens when functions have side effects such as OS-level I/O. Functions need to be applied to something for their computation to be triggered, and they also must return something. When nothing meaningful can be passed or returned, `()` should be used.
```ocaml
# read_line;;
- : unit -> string = <fun>

# print_endline;;
- : string -> unit = <fun>
```

> The function `read_line` reads an end-of-line terminated sequence of characters from standard input and returns it as a string. Reading input begins when `()` is passed.

Reviewer: Should we show an example here? Perhaps what it looks like to pass `()` to `read_line`?

Author: Yes, but there is a hicup. It would be nice to have something like this:
```ocaml
 # read_line ();;
foo bar
- : string = "foo bar"
```

However, we have to say “replace `foo bar` by your own text, followed by end of line”

The function `print_endline` prints the string followed by a line ending on standard output. Return of the unit value means the output request has been queued by the operating system.

## User-Defined Types

User defined types are always introduced using the `type … = …` construction. The keyword `type` must written in lowercase. The first ellipsis stands for type name and must not begin by a capital. The second ellipsis stands for the type definition. Three cases are possible:
1. Variant
1. Record
1. Aliases

These three kinds of type definitions are covered in next three sections.

### Variants

> Variants are also called [_tagged unions_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union). They relate to the concept of [_disjoint union_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disjoint_union).

Reviewer: Do you want an example here like you have for Enumerated, etc.?

Author: This is an introduction for the rest of this section. Examples will come later.

```ocaml
# #show option;;
type 'a option = None | Some of 'a
```

The predefined type `list` is polymorphic in the same sense. It is a variant with two constructors and can hold data of any type. Here is how it is defined in the standard library:
```ocaml
# #show list;;
type 'a list = [] | (::) of 'a * 'a list
```

The only magic here is turning constructors into symbols, which we don't cover in this tutorial. The types `bool` and `unit` also are regular variants, with the same magic:
```ocaml
# #show unit;;
type unit = ()

# #show bool;;
type bool = false | true
```

Implicitly, product types also behave as variant types. For instance, pairs can be seen as inhabitants of this type:
```ocaml
# type ('a, 'b) pair = Pair of 'a * 'b;;
type ('a, 'b) pair = Pair of 'a * 'b
```

`(int, bool) pair` would be written `int * bool`, and `Pair (42, true)` would be written `(42, true)`. From the developer's perspective, everything happens as if such a type were declared for every possible product shape. This is what allows pattern matching on products.

> Even integers and floats can be seen as enumerated-like variant types, with many constructors and funky syntactic sugar, which allows pattern matching on those types.

Author: Nice, you didn't killed “funky”.

Is this the right place for an easter egg?
Maybe this one: https://youtu.be/O0_H3F84Yjk

Reviewer: HELL YES! 😂 🕺

1. `'a list`, `'a option`, and `'a tree` are very often said to be polymorphic types. Formally, `bool list` or `int option` are the types, whilst `list` and `option` are [type operators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_constructor) that take a type as a parameter and result in a type. This is a form of [parametric polymorphism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parametric_polymorphism). `'a list` and `'a option` denote [type families](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_family), which are all the types created by applying type parameters to the operators.
2. OCaml has something called _Polymorphic Variants_. Although the types `option`, `list`, and `tree` are variants and polymorphic, they aren't polymorphic variants. They are type-parametrised variants. We stick to this usage and say the variants in this section are polymorphic. OCaml polymorphic variants are [covered in another tutorial](https://v2.ocaml.org/learn/tutorials/labels.html).

### Records

> Records are like tuples in that several values are bundled together. In a tuple, elements are identified by their position in the corresponding product type. They are either first, second, third, or at some other position. In a record, each element has a *field* that contains a name and a value. That's why record types must be declared before being used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Records are like tuples in that several values are bundled together. In a tuple, elements are identified by their position in the corresponding product type. They are either first, second, third, or at some other position. In a record, each element has a name and a value. This name-value pair is known as a field. That's why record types must be declared before being used.
```

## Predefined Types

### Integers, Characters, Booleans, and Characters

#### Integers

Here is an integer:
```ocaml
# 42;;
- : int = 42
```

The `int` type is the default and basic type of integers in OCaml. It represents platform-dependent signed integers. This means `int` does not always have same the number of bits. It depends on underlying platform characteristics, such as processor architecture or operating system. Operations on `int` values are provided by the [`Stdlib`](/api/Stdlib.html) and the [`Int`](/api/Int.html) modules.

Usually, `int` has 31 bits in 32-bit architectures and 63 in 64-bit architectures because one bit is reserved for OCaml's runtime operation. The standard library also provides [`Int32`](/api/Int32.html) and [`Int64`](/api/Int64.html) modules, which support platform independent operations on 32- and 64-bit signed integers. These modules are not detailed in this tutorial.

There are no dedicated types for unsigned integers in OCaml. Bitwise operations on `int` treat the sign bit as the other bits. Binary operators use standard symbols. The signed remainder operator is written `mod`. There is no predefined power operator on integers in OCaml.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The `int` type is the default and basic type of integers in OCaml. When you enter a whole number, OCaml recognises it as an integer, as shown in this example:

```ocaml
# 42;;
- : int = 42
```

The `int` type represents platform-dependent signed integers. This means `int` does not always have same the number of bits. It depends on underlying platform characteristics, such as processor architecture or operating system. Operations on `int` values are provided by the [`Stdlib`](/api/Stdlib.html) and the [`Int`](/api/Int.html) modules.

Usually, `int` has 31 bits in 32-bit architectures and 63 in 64-bit architectures because one bit is reserved for OCaml's runtime operation. The standard library also provides [`Int32`](/api/Int32.html) and [`Int64`](/api/Int64.html) modules, which support platform-independent operations on 32- and 64-bit signed integers. However, these modules are not detailed in this tutorial.

OCaml doesn't have dedicated types for unsigned integers. Bitwise operations on `int` treat the sign bit as the other bits. Binary operators use standard symbols. The signed remainder operator is written `mod`. Predefined power operator on integers don't exist in OCaml.

```

"...treat the sign bit..."  should this be "signed bit" ?

Author: No it is “sign bit” like here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sign_bit

Error: This expression has type float but an expression was expected of type
         int
```
Operations on `float` are provided by the [`Stdlib`](/api/Stdlib.html) and the [`Float`](/api/Float.html) modules.

#### Booleans

Boolean values are represented by the type `bool`.
```ocaml
# true;;
- : bool = true

# false;;
- : bool = false

# false < true;;
- : bool = true
```

Operations on `bool` are provided by the [`Stdlib`](/api/Stdlib.html) and the [`Bool`](/api/Bool.html) modules. The conjunction “and” is written `&&` and disjunction “or” is written `\\`. Both are short-circuited, meaning that they don't evaluate their right argument if the value of the left one is sufficient to decide the value of the whole expression.

#### Characters

Values of type `char` correspond to the 256 symbols defined in the ISO/IEC 8859-1 standard. Character literals are surrounded by single quotes. Here is an example.
```ocaml
# 'a';;
- : char = 'a'
```
Operations on `char` values are provided by the [`Stdlib`](/api/Stdlib.html) and the [`Char`](/api/Char.html) modules.

The module [`Uchar`](/api/Uchar.html) provides support for Unicode characters.

### Strings & Byte Sequences

#### Strings

> Strings are finite and fixed-sized sequences of values of type `char`. Strings are immutable, meaning it is impossible to change a character's value inside a string. The string concatenation operator symbol is `^`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strings are finite and fixed-sized sequences of `char` values. Strings are immutable, meaning it is impossible to change a character's value inside a string. The string concatenation operator symbol is `^`.
```

Would it be correct to say it this way? It gets rid of that extra prepositional phrase.

If so, could the same be done in li.139 & li.192?

Author: In a string, each value has type char, it is a sequence of char values.

Reviewer: Is that edited revision better?

```ocaml
# "hello" ^ " " ^ "world!";;
- : string = "hello world!"
```

Indexed access to string characters is possible using the following syntax:
```ocaml
# "buenos dias".[4];;
- : char : 'o'
```
Operations on `string` values are provided by the [`Stdlib`](/api/Stdlib.html) and the [`String`](/api/String.html) modules.

#### Byte Sequences

> Byte sequences are finite and fixed-sized sequences of bytes. Each individual byte is represented by a `char` value. Byte sequences are mutable, meaning they can't be extended or shortened, but each component byte may be updated. Essentially, a byte sequence `bytes` is a mutable string that can't be printed. There is no way to write `bytes` literally, so they must be produced by a function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Byte sequences are finite and fixed-sized. Each individual byte is represented by a `char` value. Byte sequences are mutable, meaning they can't be extended or shortened, but each component byte may be updated. Essentially, a byte sequence (type `bytes`) is a mutable string that can't be printed. There is no way to write `bytes` literally, so they must be produced by a function.
```

Would it work to remove "sequences of bytes" at the end of the first sentence, as it seems to repeat the beginning.

For this sentence: "a byte sequence `bytes` is a mutable string that can't be printed"
Is `bytes` a value type here? Or should it be "a byte sequence's `bytes`..."?

Author: It this doc, there are 4 kinds of sequences. All are finite.
- Strings (type `string`): elements are `char` and _can't_ be updated. Printable
- Byte Sequebce (type `bytes`): element are `char` and _can_ be updated. Non printable
- Array (type `'a array`): elements are `'a` and _can_ be updated. 
- List (type `'a list`): elements are `'a` and _can't_ be updated.

Reviewer: Is my amended suggestion better?

Operations on lists are provided by the [`List`](/api/List.html) module. There is a [dedicated tutorial on lists](https://ocaml.org/docs/lists).

### Options & Results

#### Options

The `option` type is also a polymorphic type. Option values can store any kind of data or represent the absence of any such data. Option values can only be constructed in two different ways: either `None`, when no data is available, or `Some`, otherwise.
```ocaml
# None;;
- : 'a option = None

# Some 42;;
- : int option = Some 42

# Some "hello";;
- : string option = Some "hello"
```

Here is an example of pattern matching on an option value.
```ocaml
# match Some 42 with None -> raise Exit | Some x -> x;;
- : int = 42
```

Operations on options are provided by the [`Option`](/api/Option.html) module. Options are discussed in the [Error Handling](/docs/error-handling) guide.

#### Results

> The `result` type can be used to express that the outcome of a function can be either success or failure. There are only two ways to build a result value: either using `Ok` or `Error` with the intended meaning. Both constructors can hold any kind of data. The `result` type is polymorphic, but it has two type parameters: one for `Ok` values and another for `Error` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `result` type can be used to express that a function's outcome can be either success or failure. There are only two ways to build a result value: either using `Ok` or `Error` with the intended meaning. Both constructors can hold any kind of data. The `result` type is polymorphic, but it has two type parameters: one for `Ok` values and another for `Error` values.
```

```ocaml
# type commit =
  | Hash of string
  | Tag of string
  | Branch of string
  | Head
  | Fetch_head
  | Orig_head
  | Merge_head;;
type commit =
    Hash of string
  | Tag of string
  | Branch of string
  | Head
  | Fetch_head
  | Orig_head
  | Merge_head

```

Here is how to convert a `commit` to a `string` using pattern matching:
```ocaml
# let commit_to_string = function
  | Hash sha -> sha
  | Tag name -> name
  | Branch name -> name
  | Head -> "HEAD"
  | Fetch_head -> "FETCH_HEAD"
  | Orig_head -> "ORIG_HEAD"
  | Merge_head -> "MERGE_HEAD";;
val commit_to_string : commit -> string = <fun>
```

Here, the `function …` construct is used instead of the `match … with …` construct used previously.
```ocaml
let commit_to_string' x = match x with
  | Hash sha -> sha
  | Tag name -> name
  | Branch name -> name
  | Head -> "HEAD"
  | Fetch_head -> "FETCH_HEAD"
  | Orig_head -> "ORIG_HEAD"
  | Merge_head -> "MERGE_HEAD";;
val commit_to_string' : commit -> string = <fun>
```

> The `match … with …` construct needs to be passed an expression that is inspected. The `function …` is a special form of anonymous function taking a parameter and forwarding it to a `match … with …` construct as shown above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to pass an inspected expression to the `match … with …` construct. The `function …` is a special form of anonymous function that takes a parameter and forwards it to a `match … with …` construct, as shown above.
```

Does this first sentence still say the same thing?

Author: Indeed, except in much better way.

```ocaml
# let rec has_field name = function
  | Array u ->
      List.fold_left (fun b obj -> b || has_field name obj) false u
  | Object u ->
      List.fold_left (fun b (key, obj) -> b || key = name || has_field name obj) false u
  | _ -> false;;
val has_field : string -> json -> bool = <fun>
```

Here, the last pattern uses the symbol `_`, which catches everything. It allows returning `false` on all data which is neither `Array` nor `Object`.

### Polymorphic Data Types

#### Revisiting Predefined Types

The predefined type `option` is defined as a variant type with two constructors: `Some` and `None`. It can contain values of any type, such as `Some 42` or `Some "hola"`. In that sense, `option` is polymorphic. Here is how it is defined in the standard library:

```ocaml
# #show option;;
type 'a option = None | Some of 'a
```

The predefined type `list` is polymorphic in the same sense. It is a variant with two constructors and can hold data of any type. Here is how it is defined in the standard library:
```ocaml
# #show list;;
type 'a list = [] | (::) of 'a * 'a list
```

> The only bit of magic here is turning constructors into symbols. This is left unexplained in this tutorial. The types `bool` and `unit` also are regular variants, with the same magic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only bit of magic here is turning constructors into symbols, which we don't cover in this tutorial. The types `bool` and `unit` also are regular variants, with the same magic:
```

If not in this tutorial, where can we find it?

Author: Need to add that into the “operators” tutorial

In the end, the only type construction that does not reduce to a variant is the function arrow type. It is possible to perform pattern matching on values of any type, except functions.

#### User-Defined Polymorphic

Here is an example of a variant type that combines constructors with data, constructors without data, polymorphism, and recursion:
```ocaml
# type 'a tree =
  | Leaf
  | Node of 'a * 'a tree * 'a tree;;
type 'a tree = Leaf | Node of 'a * 'a tree * 'a tree
```

It can be used to represent arbitrarily labelled binary trees. Assuming such a tree would be labelled with integers, here is a possible way to compute the sum of the integers it contains, using recursion and pattern-matching.
```ocaml
# let rec sum = function
  | Leaf -> 0
  | Node (x, lft, rht) -> x + sum lft + sum rht;;
val sum : int tree -> int = <fun>
```

Here is how the map function can be defined in this type:
```ocaml
# let rec map f = function
  | Leaf -> Leaf
  | Node (x, lft, rht) -> Node (f x, map f lft, map f rht);;
val map : ('a -> 'b) -> 'a tree -> 'b tree = <fun>
```

> In the OCaml community as well as in the larger functional programming community, the word *polymorphism* is used loosely. It is applied to things working in a similar fashion with various types. Several features of OCaml are polymorphic, in the broad sense, each is using a particular form of it, including its own name. In summary, OCaml has several forms of polymorphism. In most cases, the distinction between those concepts is blurred, but it sometimes needs to distinguish them. Here are the terms applicable to datatypes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the OCaml community as well as in the larger functional programming community, the word *polymorphism* is used loosely. It is applied to things working in a similar fashion with various types. Several features of OCaml are polymorphic, in the broad sense. Each uses a particular form of it, including its own name. In summary, OCaml has several forms of polymorphism. In most cases, the distinction between those concepts is blurred, but it sometimes needs to distinguish them. Here are the terms applicable to datatypes:
```

When you say "each is using a particular form of it..." -- each what? Each feature of OCaml?

Author: _Features of ocaml which are polymorphic_

Reviewer: I rewrote it as: "In the OCaml community, as well as in the larger functional programming community, the word *polymorphism* is used loosely. It is applied to things working in a similar fashion with various types. Several features of OCaml are polymorphic in this broad sense. Each polymorphic feature uses a particular form of polymorphism, including its own name. In summary, OCaml has several forms of polymorphism. In most cases, the distinction between those concepts is blurred, but it sometimes necessary to distinguish them. Here are the terms applicable to datatypes:"

1. `'a list`, `'a option`, and `'a tree` are very often said to be polymorphic types. Formally, `bool list` or `int option` are the types, whilst `list` and `option` are [type operators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_constructor) that take a type as a parameter and result in a type. This is a form of [parametric polymorphism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parametric_polymorphism). `'a list` and `'a option` denote [type families](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_family), which are all the types created by applying type parameters to the operators.
2. OCaml has something called _Polymorphic Variants_. Although the types `option`, `list`, and `tree` are variants and polymorphic, they aren't polymorphic variants. They are type-parametrised variants. We stick to this usage and say the variants in this section are polymorphic. OCaml polymorphic variants are [covered in another tutorial](https://v2.ocaml.org/learn/tutorials/labels.html).

### Records

> Records are like tuples in that several values are bundled together. In a tuple, elements are identified by their position in the corresponding product type. They are either first, second, third, or at some other position. In a record, each element has a name, it's a field. That's why record types must be declared before being used.

Reviewer: Let's clarify what this sentence means: "In a record, each element has a name, it's a field."

Each element has a name, and that name is a field? The element is a field? There is a field for the name?

Author: A field is a pair, a name and a value. The fields (i.e. the name-value pairs) are the elements composing a record.

Reviewer: How about this:  "In a record, each element has a *field* that contains a name and a value."

Does this make it clear that the name-value pair is known as a field?

Or should it be: "In a record, each element has a name and a value. This name-value pair is known as a field."

Reviewer: (I changed it to the first sentence, but we can further revise it if necessary.)

Author: > In a record, each element has a name and a value. This name-value pair is known as a field.

This is the best wording

# let alignment (Character (_, _, _, _, alignment, _)) = alignment;;
val alignment : character' -> firmness * rectitude = <fun>

# let armor_class (Character (_, _, _, _, _, armor_class)) = armor_class;;
val armor_class : character -> int = <fun>
```

One function will retrieve and read the contained data per field. It provides the same functionality as the dotted notation.
```ocaml
# let ghorghor_bey' = Character ("Ghôrghôr Bey", 17, "half-ogre", Fighter, (Chaotic, R_Neutral), -8);;
val ghorghor_bey' : character =
  Character ("Ghôrghôr Bey", 17, "half-ogre", Fighter, (Chaotic, R_Neutral), -8)

# level ghorghor_bey';;
- : int = 17
```
Writing `level ghorghor_bey'` is the same as `ghorghor_bey.level`.

**Remarks**

1. To be true to facts, it is not possible to encode all records as variants because OCaml provides a means to define fields whose value can be updated, which isn't available while defining variant types. This will be detailed in an upcoming tutorial on imperative programming.

1. Records **should not** be defined using this technique. It is only demonstrated here to further illustrate the expressive strength of OCaml variants.

> 1. This way, to define records **may** be applied to _Generalised Algebraic Data Types_, which is the subject of another tutorial.

Reviewer: To define record may be applied to...
Defining records may be applied to...
The definition of records may be applied to...

Which of these is correct?

Author: It is the coma which is misleading and should go away. This is like: "This way to do the hula hoop ..."

Reviewer: So like: "Defining records in this way may be applied to ...."
"This method of defining records may be applied to..."

In English we'd say something more like: "This is the way to do the hula hoop" or "The way to do the hula hoop is to rotate your hips...."

Author: I understand, thanks for the clarification. I like 
> Defining records in this way may be applied to

BTW, this has moved to the `0lg_11_records_as_variants.md` file

`distribute` function recursively on their subexpressions. This ensures that all
subexpressions within the expression get multiplied out too (if you only wanted
to multiply out the very top level of an expression, then you could replace all
the remaining patterns with a simple `e -> e` rule).

The reverse operation, i.e., factorising out common subexpressions, can be
implemented in a similar fashion. The following version only works for the toplevel expression.
```ocaml env=expr
# let top_factorise = function
  | Plus (Times (e1, e2), Times (e3, e4)) when e1 = e3 ->
     Times (e1, Plus (e2, e4))
  | Plus (Times (e1, e2), Times (e3, e4)) when e2 = e4 ->
     Times (Plus (e1, e3), e4)
  | e -> e;;
val top_factorise : expr -> expr = <fun>
# top_factorise (Plus (Times (Var "n", Var "x"),
                   Times (Var "n", Var "y")));;
- : expr = Times (Var "n", Plus (Var "x", Var "y"))
```

The factorise function above introduces another feature: *guards* to each
pattern. It is the conditional that follows the `when`, and it means that
the return code is executed only if the pattern matches and the condition in the
`when` clause is satisfied.

## Conclusion

> This tutorial has provided a comprehensive overview of the basic data types in OCaml and their usage. We have explored the built-in types, such as integers, floats, characters, lists, tuples, and strings, and the user-defined types: records and variants. Records and tuples are mechanisms for grouping heterogeneous data into cohesive units. Variants are a mechanism for exposing heterogeneous data as coherent alternatives.

Reviewer: Should the comments/definitions of Records and tuples be in their respective sections (both in this paragraph and the one beneath)? Is this repetitive here, or is the intention to summarise what was already said to remind the reader? If so, I'd like to reword it slightly. 

Currently it reads as if we're getting this information for the first time.

Author: I need to rewrite the whole conclusion

This tutorial begins with a section presenting the types that are predefined in OCaml. It starts with atomic types such as integers and Booleans. It continues by presenting predefined compound types such as strings and lists. The tutorial ends with a section about user-defined types: variants and records.

The OCaml type system aggregates several type systems, also known as disciplines:

> - A [nominal type system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nominal_type_system) is used for predefined types, variants, and functions. Historically, it the first system, directly coming from the type system used the [ML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ML_(programming_language)) programming language, which is OCaml accestor. By default, this what is meant by OCaml type system, and it is also the scope of this tutorial.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A [nominal type system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nominal_type_system) is used for predefined types, variants, and functions. Historically, it the first system, directly coming from the type system used the [ML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ML_(programming_language)) programming language, which is OCaml's ancestor. By default, this is what is meant by OCaml type system, and it is also the scope of this tutorial.
```

Author: Manually merged

- Two different [structural type systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structural_type_system) are also used:
  * One for polymorphic variants
  * Another for objects and classes

> OCaml also provides Generalized Algebraic Data Types, which are an extensions of those presented in this tutorial. Types that are in the scope of this tutorial are the most basic  ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OCaml also provides [Generalized Algebraic Data Types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized_algebraic_data_type), which are an extensions of those presented in this tutorial. Types that are in the scope of this tutorial are the most basic  ones.
```

Author: Manually merged link somewhere else.

## Prerequisites and Goals

This is an intermediate-level tutorial. The only prerequisite is to have completed the [Get Started](https://ocaml.org/docs/up-and-running) series of tutorials.

<!--
The goal of this tutorial is to provide for the following capabilities:
- Handle data of all predefined types using dedicated syntax
- Write variant type definitions: simple, recursive, and polymorphic
- Write record type definitions (without mutable fields)
- Write type aliases
- Use pattern matching to define functions for all basic type
-->

> The goal of this tutorial will provide capabilities to handle data from predefined, variant and record types. This importantly includes pattern matching on those types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal of this tutorial is to teach skills on how to handle data from predefined, variant and record types. This importantly includes pattern matching on those types.
```

Author: Manually merged and moved into the first paragraph.
